This is Daily Producer Caitlyn O'Keefe
and I'm here with my colleague Anna
Foley. Anna, what time is it and where
are we? It's currently 6:08 in the
morning. We are walking up to the State
Farm Stadium. There's a huge parking lot
that is just like mazes full of people
waiting in line and they're all here for
Charlie Kirk's memorial service in
Glendale, Arizona. And that's why we're
here to talk to them.
>> The back of the line. Down there. Not
over here. Down there.
>> What time did you get here this morning?
We woke up at 3:30 and then left at
4:00. We got up at 2:30 this morning and
showed up here around 4:10.
>> Me and my friend drove 16 hours straight
from East Texas and have not slept one
week.
[Applause]
If you could say in one or two words how
you're feeling right now, what would you
say?
>> Heartbroken,
shocked.
>> I'm feeling moved by the movement.
Probably empowered. Definitely.
>> I think everybody here feels like we
lost a leader and truly honestly one of
God's soldiers. It really feels like
they killed one of ours.
>> What made you decide to come out today?
>> This is a historical moment. This was a
Martin Luther King Jr. in our day that
was essentially assassinated for his
free speech and this is our turning
point as well.
>> I think this is igniting a fire in
America. There is a sense of good and
evil. There is a sense of right and
wrong and this is kind of the time
people are waking up to realize which
side am I going to be on.
>> They wanted to silence him and they
turned him into a martyr.
>> What do you hope to hear in there?
I want to hear true leadership
say that they will no longer tolerate
this. Not with words, but with policies,
with laws, no longer being tolerant to
the left. It's now clear that the one
person that was willing to reach across
the aisle and have conversations with
them, they shot him. So, at this point,
there there is no changing their minds.
There is no uh kumbaya anymore. You're
over there, we're over here, you stand
for that, we stand for this. Why is it
always our side being attacked?
[Music]
From the New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the Daily.
On Sunday, conservatives from all around
the country flocked to Arizona to
memorialize the slain political leader
Charlie Kirk. The service included
leaders from the highest levels of the
US government, including Vice President
Vance and President Trump. During the
memorial, two clear messages emerged.
One of Christian unity, the other, a vow
to fight political enemies on the left.
Today, my colleague Robert Draper
explains how the collision of those two
messages makes this a crucial moment for
the MAGA movement.
It's Monday, September 22nd.
[Music]
Robert, thank you so much for being
here. It's been such a long day for you.
I can't even imagine what time you had
to wake up this morning to cover the
funeral.
>> I think it was 3:20 a.m. But, uh, in any
event, I'm happy to be speaking to you.
So, you were out reporting in the crowd
all day today at Charlie Kirk's memorial
service, and I wonder if you could just
start by describing what the scene was
like.
>> Well, it certainly met, if not exceeded,
Turning Point USA's expectations. I
mean, they got a football stadium for
this with a seating capacity of 63,000
and and an overflow stadium, I think,
that holds another 12,000 or so. And
both were definitely filled. People were
turned away. And of course, it was
Republican royalty who attended, not
only the people on Air Force One and Air
Force 2, but a number of members of
Congress and senators as well as cabinet
members.
>> That's actually the reason why we wanted
to talk to you about what happened
today, because yes, on its face, this
was a memorial, of course, but it wasn't
just a memorial, right? Because it
seemed to actually be these two things
at once. This service for Charlie Kirk,
but also a major political event. You
had some of the most influential leaders
of the MAGA movement at this ceremony.
You had the president of the United
States. You had right-wing influencers.
All of these people got up and spoke
about Charlie Kirk. And underlying all
their speeches was this sort of
existential message about what his death
means for the MAGA movement, where it
goes from here, and what kind of
rallying cry, frankly, different people
were hearing in this moment in Charlie
Kirk's name. And that's what feels like
it's important to unpack with you now.
>> No, I think that's right, Rachel. I
mean, for one thing, start with the fact
that Charlie Kirk was the head of this
very powerful political organizing force
called Turning Point USA. And so to
attend a funeral celebrating the life of
Charlie Kirk was
>> going to inescapably be a political
event. And so it was. in not only in
terms of the fact that a lot of
politicians spoke but because Kirk
himself and his death have a lot of
portent for the conservative movement
and I think that on the heels of his
death we're likely to see a lot of
jostling for how to reshape the MAGA
movement and in whose image it will be
shaped and in fact you could see at the
event these two forces of a celebration
in the evangelical
Christian way of a Christian leader's
life collide with the sort of hard
knuckle politics of the conservative
movement.
>> Well, let's talk about how those two
forces really revealed themselves
throughout the course of what was a
hours long ceremony. How did the
memorial actually begin?
It really bore the stamp of Charlie
Kirk's Turning Point USA events which
really had become over the years
practically rock concerts.
This was more toned down but still there
was this procession of bag pipes playing
Amazing Grace. There were two or three
famous Christian rock bands playing.
And so it very much began with all of
the tonality of what you'd expected of a
funeral at an evangelical mega church.
[Music]
>> That was the atmosphere set by Turning
Point. And that's how this funeral began
>> with speaker after speaker talking about
Charlie Kirk's faith.
>> Charlie Kirk called me his pastor.
I called him my friend. He loved God
more than he loved safety or applause or
even his own life.
>> The legacy he built, his values, his
love of God and true joy he found in his
savior Jesus Christ.
>> And how that not only anchored him but
inspired so many people. And so there
was a period composed purely of speeches
given by people who had worked with
Kirk.
>> It was the honor of my life to serve you
as you serve Jesus. There was no
discussion of partisan politics.
>> And I would say this to all of you.
>> The Lord loves you.
>> And it's notable that in that first
hour, there were no elected officials on
that stage.
>> You see, Charlie looked at politics as
an on-ramp to Jesus. He knew if he could
get all of you rowing in the streams of
liberty, you'd come to its source, and
that's the Lord.
>> Robert, you alluded to the fact that
that wasn't the case all day. So, can
you just help describe when does the
tone start to change?
>> Sure. Roughly around midway, the
biographical picture of Charlie Kirk as
a father, a husband, a leader, and an
inspiration begins to move and replacing
it is the notion of Charlie Kirk,
martyr. 11 days ago, my friend was
martyed for using his voice to engage in
peaceful dialogue.
>> Charlie Kirk, a Christian warrior who
was felled by the left. And and it's
easy to note that the more political
figures take the stage, the more you see
that language get ratcheted up.
>> Ladies and gentlemen, please welcome
Benny Johnson.
The first that really stood out to me
was by the right-wing podcaster Benny
Johnson.
>> Fight for Charlie Kirk, who feels the
Holy Spirit in the house tonight,
>> who had done a lot of Turning Point USA
events, was really, you know, a
lieutenant in a way of Kirks. They were
very close. And his speech was the first
one, I believe, that talked about the
mission against evil. And so we want to
thank the administration for being here
and carrying out that godly mission of
wielding the sword against evil. And
that's an exact phrase that he used
about wielding the sword in that godly
mission against evil.
>> Please welcome to the stage Jack Pobic.
>> Shortly after him came Jack Pobic.
>> Charlie Kirk was my friend.
Charlie was my brother.
and Charlie was my commanding officer.
>> Another close friend of Charlie Kirks
and another podcaster who compared Kirk
to Moses at the top of the mountain.
>> The Bible tells us
that on his last day,
Moses looked across the river Jordan
and he saw the promised land.
He led the people there,
but he did not cross himself.
and and said that though Charlie Kirk
may not have gotten to the promised
land, he has brought us all there to the
promised land.
>> On his last day, Charlie Kirk led us
there and Charlie Kirk has brought us to
the promised land. But he was saying
that
>> and the question of our time
will western civilization endure.
>> You know that the sacrifice of Charles
James Kirk will be seen a century from
now as the turning point of
civilization.
>> That a century from now when they write
of the two or three pivotal moments that
led
to the saving of Western civilization.
They will write that the sacrifice of
Charles James Kirk was the turning point
>> and that western civilization was saved
by Charlie Kirk. He talked about
fighting evil in the highest of places.
>> For Charlie, we will end the evil
disease that split us and took Charlie
from us. And for Charlie, Turning Point
USA will last forever. So those two
really I think set the tone for the uh
political speeches that were to a
follow.
>> We were also by the way I should say we
were watching along here in the New York
Times office and that's what really
struck me was that part of the messaging
seemed to be this positioning of Kirk as
part of this larger divine plan. And in
so doing that, the point was also to
position the larger MAGA movement within
that same divine plan to basically say
this is something that is like handed
down by the will of God in a way that
was a little bit frankly reminiscent of
the assassination attempt of Donald
Trump where we saw just days later at
the Republican National Convention,
there was this really revealing
statement that basically Trump was saved
by God to save the country. So it it all
felt of a peace in a way.
>> Yes. And I think that this was
reminiscent because in both cases the
third person plural was frequently
invoked by the right. They tried to do
this to President Trump. They did this
to Charlie Kirk.
>> They also had a goal of gaining control
of the media and Hollywood so they could
change the culture in America.
>> They kill and terrorize their opponents
hoping to silence them. Who do you think
they were talking about when they said
that evil they?
>> It's pretty vague though. Those
individuals who were saying they had in
the past meant the left when they were
referring to they. But it ceases to be
an inference and becomes abundantly
clear who they is once Donald Trump Jr.
took the stage.
>> The true extremists are those who would
justify and celebrate taking an innocent
life over nothing more than
disagreement.
That is the real radicalism.
>> Junior was the first person on the stage
to use the phrase fake news media or
even to talk about liberals on campus
going crazy
>> because the left-wing activists, they
were going crazy
>> and actually was also the first person
to mention any Democrat at all. When
>> to say Charlie knew more about the Bible
than me is an understatement, folks.
>> Don Jr. trying to kind of crack a joke
about how little he knows about the
Bible said obviously that's an
understatement.
>> It's like saying Donald Trump knows more
about being president than Hillary
Clinton or Camala Harris.
>> No kidding.
>> Right. That was the moment where it
seemed like it went from a memorial to
an overtly political moment.
>> I think that's right. And and especially
when we hear Dun Jr. close his remarks
the way he did because he he kind of did
this repetition of saying, you know, if
you believe in God and country,
>> if you believe in God and family and
country, you are one of us.
>> You are one of us. Of course, implying
that if you don't believe in God and
country, you're not one of us.
>> If you reject the propaganda of the fake
news media, welcome.
So he establishes kind of the MAGA set
of grievances or the MAGA set of virtues
and and then basically says use Charlie
Kirk's death to come closer into our
movement.
>> Charlie loved this country, its people,
and the work of persuading others to
believe in something greater than
themselves.
At this point in the memorial, it really
sort of felt as though the messaging
that was coming through was Charlie Kirk
was a prophet. He died for you in the
audience for this movement and therefore
you should join us in our fight against
the evil them, whatever that fight might
look like.
>> I think that's right. And I think that
the next speaker, Vice President JD
Vance, made that message even more
explicit when he said to the audience
that, and to use Vance's words, that
Charlie Kirk was murdered for speaking
the truth.
>> Because he was murdered for speaking the
truth
>> and that evil is among us.
>> I think he would encourage me to be
honest that evil still walks among us.
not to ignore it for the sake of a fake
kumbaya moment, but to address it headon
and honestly as the sickness that it is.
>> This is not going to be a kumbaya
moment, you know, one where we all just
kind of come together. So the movement
there is not just one of carrying on
bigger and better than before,
>> but to defeat the evil that indeed tried
to defeat Charlie Kirk,
>> which if you just pause for a second,
seems like a really stunning thing to
hear from the vice president of the
United States. I mean, one way to look
at what he is saying here from a more
cynical viewpoint, if you're if you're
thinking that this is really being
seized on as a political moment, is that
by saying basically, join us in our
fight against them, in a way, it's like
laying the groundwork for justification
of whatever actions might be taken to
strike back against this enemy on the
left, right? Even if those actions
aren't super clear in this moment.
>> Sure. I think that's been a subtext of
the MAGA movement at least since 2020
when Trump ran for reelection for the
first time that the left is encouraable.
The left cannot be persuaded. It's not
anything new, but it has become much
more intense and the language I think
much more stark. And of course, it's one
thing to hear, you know, a broadcaster
say it, another thing entirely to hear
the vice president of the United States
say it from his position of stature.
As I was watching throughout the night,
it really felt like there was a kind of
wavering between these two messages that
you have described to us. This religious
message and then a more political and
pugilistic message. And at times these
really seem to be overlapping with some
of these speakers.
>> Yes. And and as it turned out, and I
think this was entirely unintentional,
but completely remarkable to see, the
final two speakers of the evening would
represent in diametric opposition to
each other those two very viewpoints.
[Music]
We'll be right back.
So, Robert, take us to the end of the
memorial and the final two speakers.
Tell us who they were and what they
said.
>> Please give a warm welcome to Mrs. Erica
Kirk.
The penultimate speaker was Erica Kirk,
the wife of Charlie Kirk and uh now the
CEO and chair of Turning Point USA.
>> Hello.
God bless all of you
for coming here from all over the world
to honor and celebrate my Charlie.
It was in many ways the representation
of the spiritual side not only of
Turning Point USA and not only of
Charlie Kirk, but of how those closest
to Kirk wanted to view his death.
>> 11 days ago,
God accepted that total surrender from
my husband
and then called him to his side. She
spoke very declaratively about not only
her husband and what their marriage was
like.
>> Charlie perfectly understood
God's role for a Christian husband.
Love your wives and lead them.
>> But also it was an interesting evocation
of what she believed a conservative
Christian marriage should look like and
what it should not look like. But please
be a leader worth following.
Your wife is not your servant.
>> There was a point where she said, "Your
wife is not your servant. Your wife is
not your employee. Your wife is not your
slave."
>> But your wife is your helper. I believe
she said
>> she is your helper.
>> Is your helper. Exactly.
>> You are one flesh working together for
the glory of God.
And so what she was describing was in a
much much softer way what a conservative
Christian union would look like.
>> Charlie passionately
wanted to reach and save the lost boys
of the West.
The young men who feel like they have no
direction. But I' I'd say that easily
the most memorable thing that Erica Kirk
said
>> he wanted to save
young men
just like the one who took his life
>> were three words.
>> I forgive him.
[Applause]
Referring to the alleged murderer. and
she got a standing ovation and wept as
everyone clapped.
>> I forgive him because it was what Christ
did
and is what Charlie would do.
>> She was speaking the language of
nonviolent politics where others were
talking about how her husband had been
silenced. Her framing of that was when
you stop the dialogue then violence
comes into the scene.
>> The answer to hate is not hate.
The answer we know from the gospel is
love and always love.
Love for our enemies
and love for those who persecute us.
Had the program concluded after Erica
Kirk, it would have felt like an
entirely different thing. That's not of
course what took place.
>> Well, I want to thank you very much,
Lee.
>> The other main event was the president
of the United States, Donald Trump, and
maybe 10 to 15 minutes into his speech,
Donald Trump, as he is want to do, said
the quiet part out loud.
>> The left, the left, I call it the
radical left. I call it sometimes the
radical left lunatics. It gave a name to
who the they was, who it was that was
silencing Charlie Kirk, who was the
enemy. He called them the radical left
lunatics. And then Trump interrupted
himself and said,
>> "But Charlie didn't say that. He called
it the left."
>> But Charlie didn't say that. He just
called them the left. And then, as an
aside,
>> he was probably right, but I can't help
it.
I can't help. The president went on and
said, "He was probably right, but I
couldn't help myself." And so by Trump
comparing himself to Charlie Kirk there,
he was in this interesting way making
Charlie kind of the diplomatic political
type and making himself the outsider and
truth teller.
>> He did not hate his opponents. He wanted
the best for them. That's where I
disagreed with Charlie.
I hate my opponent
>> and I don't want the best for them. I'm
sorry. I am sorry, Erica.
>> He was establishing permission for
everyone in the audience to basically
hate your enemy, to want the wars for
them, to really want to smite them. And
then Trump took it a step further and
basically said that he had warned
Charlie Kirk about going to these campus
events. There were bomb threats, pulled
fire alarms, and countless ragefilled
radicals who tried to shout him down. It
was nasty. I used to say, "Charlie, this
is nasty stuff you're doing."
>> He thought it was great on the one hand,
but he also said, "Charlie, this is
nasty stuff you're doing." And so, he
certainly wasn't blaming Kirk for his
own assassination, but he was saying, "I
warned you this kind of thing would
happen. These are the kind of people
we're dealing with." And the violence
comes largely from the left. You don't
hear that from too many people, do you?
And
>> in the end, these people can't be
reasoned with. You just have to kind of
steamroller them.
>> And the children, God bless the United
States of America. And could I ask
Erica, please come out? Erica, please
come out. Thank you.
It felt like compared to Erica Kirk's
speech, ultimately these are two very
different views of where this movement
that Kirk started is supposed to go from
here. And you're getting these two
different views from arguably the two
most important speakers at this event.
>> That's right. And Erica has not spoken
much at all about her own political
views beyond the fact that she supports
Donald Trump. She she's not as
politically explicit as her husband is.
But, you know, while I was listening to
Trump give his tribute to Charlie Kirk,
I did find myself thinking from time to
time, you know, this is not it may be
cognitively dissonant with Erica Kirk,
who we just heard, but it's not
necessarily cognitively dissonant with
Charlie Kirk and and I began thinking
about that particularly when Trump
talked about his beautiful victories and
then he actually talked about 2020 and
he said, "We really did great that
night, too." He said, "But they cheated
like dogs, but we got them back, didn't
we?" And and the reason I was thinking
of that was that Charlie Kirk was one of
the most prominent voices in saying that
the election was rigged and he never
took back those words. So it was
interesting then to listen to this
speech and hear how he framed Charlie
Kirk as the kind of more diplomatic
between himself and Kirk that in fact
Kirk's belief system did not depart that
greatly from Trump's.
>> He also believed that the border should
be sealed. In fact Kirk in his final
year or so was really talking about how
even legal immigration must cease. He
has talked about transgender individuals
as being mentally ill. Kirk has, which
is very much conssonate with what Trump
has said.
>> You're saying that there wasn't a lot of
daylight between these two men.
>> No, there was a great deal of daylight
in how they couched things. But in terms
of hardcore policy beliefs, these guys
were pretty much in lock step.
>> But obviously now his wife has taken
over the institution that he started.
and her message was just so starkly
different than some of the political
rallying cries that we heard. And so I
just wonder which one of these messages
you think is going to win out at the end
of the day because in some ways they
seem to be in tension or in conflict. I
I agree with you because I think that
Erica Kirk views herself, if she views
herself in any kind of large capacity,
as a spiritual leader where Charlie Kirk
was a spiritual person who was a
political leader. Turning Point USA was
a fusion of those two. So, will the new
CEO, the new chair, Erica Kirk, become
more politically overt when she goes to
visit campuses, as her husband did, and
as she pledged to do in her speech, will
she go just to meet and give speeches,
or is she going to engage in the kind of
rigorous give and take debate that
Charlie Kirk did? Will she be giving
campaign speeches? It's really hard to
know like what if any role a person
named Kirk will play in American
politics now that Charlie Kirk has left
the stage for good.
>> Just to step back for a minute because
we just heard a lot of people today say
on stage and even some attendees that
Kirk's death is the turning point. And I
wonder what you make of that. I'm so
glad you asked that because the phrase
turning point now is so fraught with
significance, but no one seems to be
able to articulate just what that means.
There are many people who feel like
his assassination marks a kind of
turning point that it has to have
changed something.
>> I mean, we we heard over and over, one
thing that really won't change is
Turning Point USA, except it'll be
bigger and better than before. But
basically will continue Charlie's work.
But then what does
we seem at least you know and and this
is not nothing in the 11 days since
Kirk's assassination there has not been
this roing violence from the right but
is there going to be an agreement that
that is not the way?
Everyone seems to feel like this was a
moment, but what the moment signifies in
terms of how it turns our nation, no
one's been able to say.
[Music]
>> Robert, thank you so much.
>> It's my pleasure.
>> We'll be right back.
[Music]
here's what else you need to know today.
Britain, Canada, and Australia confirmed
on Sunday that they now formally
recognize Palestinian statethood, piling
pressure on Israel to ease the
humanitarian crisis in Gaza and putting
three major allies at odds with the
Trump administration.
The news will almost certainly deepen
the diplomatic isolation of Israel's
Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. But
so far, moves to recognize a Palestinian
state have not curbed Israel's military
campaign against Hamas in Gaza, which
has killed tens of thousands of people
and left much of the enclave in ruins.
And President Trump said in an interview
on Sunday that the media mogul Rupert
Murdoch and his son Lachland, the chief
executive of Fox Corporation, could be
among the investors involved in a deal
to bring the popular video app Tik Tok
under US ownership. The interest comes
as Bite Dance, Tik Tok's Chinese owner,
races to line up investors for a deal
that would separate the app's US
business from that of its Chinese
parent. That move is required under a
federal law passed last year amid
national security concerns about Tik
Tok's ties to China.
[Music]
Today's episode was produced by Michael
Simon Johnson, Mary Wilson, Anna Foley,
and Caitlyn O'Keefe. It was edited by
Rachel Quester, Lexi Dio, and Ben
Calhoun, and was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
[Music]
That's it for the daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.
[Music]